>> Brian Holt: So what happens if I have
these friends at my party, and more people
show up, and I wanna keep adding one for
every person who shows up to my party?
I could do something like this,
so first of all,
notice that we're using
let here instead of const.
If I said const here, it's gonna say, hey,
you already had friends at your party,
you can't assign that
to be something else.
So if you know that friends at your
party is going to change down the road,
you say let.
>> Brian Holt: Some of you might ask,
why don't I just always use lets, then I
never have to worry about these errors?
And there are people that do that, so that
is a valid thing to say, but I do not.
I like const, there's a thing called
the principle of least power.
That you use the most
simple thing possible,
so const does not have
the power to change.
Therefore, if I look way down in the code
and I see friends at your party again,
I know that that is not changing
because I knew it was a const before.
So there's an assumption i get to
make about code that I wrote, and
I think that's a really good thing,
personally.
And there are people who will disagree
with me and I disagree with them.
So screw you guys, I'm the one teaching.
So this one does have to change,
so that's why I say let.
Right, so let friendsAtYourParty = 0, and
then I say friendsAtYourParty is
reassigned friendsAtYourParty + 1.
Right, so
whatever friendsAtYourParty was before
is now assigned whatever it was + 1,
and I can do that.
I can reference friendsAtYourParty when
I'm reassigning friendsAtYourParty,
because this gets run first, and
then it gets assigned to this,
does that make sense?
So I can reference in here,
because here, at this particular moment,
it's gonna be 0, because that's
what it is, so it's gonna be 0 + 1.
And then this is going to be the answer
of 1 and it's gonna be reassigned here.
So this is now 1, then 2, then 3, so
on and so forth until you get down to
the bottom and you have 10, make sense?
>> Brian Holt: So
it'd be nice if there was a better way
to do this so I didn't have to copy and
paste this every time that I
wanted to add someone to my party.
There is, luckily,
talked about let and const.
Something that you will see that,
this is old JavaScript, you will see var,
V-A-R, I'm not gonna talk about
it today because it is old.
And you really shouldn't be using var,
I'm gonna say ever,
I don't think you should ever use var.
I know Kyle Simpson would disagree
with me, and again, he's in Texas,
I am here, so I get to say what I want.
var is the old way of doing it,
I don't think it's good anymore,
you should use let.
There are some differences there,
and they're not worth discussing.
If you'd like to look at it, there's
good blog posts on it, just Google it.
So we're gonna do what's called a loop.
Now, a loop allows us to execute
something multiple times.
So the first one that we're gonna
learn here is called a while loop,
which is really,
really similar to an if statement.
So I'm gonna say let
friendsAtYourParty = 0.
I'll say while friendsAtYourParty < 10,
so as long as this statement is true,
it's gonna keep doing whatever it's doing.
So here I'm gonna say, friendsAtYourParty
= friendsAtYourParty + 1,
right?
>> Brian Holt: As long as that's true,
then it's gonna keep adding something,
eventually this is going to
get bigger than 10, right?
Eventually this is going to become false,
and then it's gonna console.log,
it's gonna break out of that and
it's gonna keep going.
Right, so it's actually gonna run this
statement here on line 3, the one
between the curly braces, ten times,
and then it's going to break out of it.
It's actually gonna run it 11 times,
technically, and
then it's gonna log it out here,
which is why you're able to see 10 here.
Does that make sense, so
while this is true, do this.
Now what happens if I made this 15?
>> Brian Holt: It doesn't even
ever get run, because it's gonna ask us
first, hey, while friendsAtYourParty < 10,
well, 15 is never less than 10, so
it's just gonna not ever run it.
Now if I get down here and say negative
100, this is gonna get run 110
times until it's less than 10, and
then it finishes, then it's done,
right?
>> Brian Holt: Make sense?
So this is a while loop, I will say that
you do use while loops, I don't think I
use them, I wouldn't say maybe daily, but
maybe weekly, so they are useful to know.
We're gonna get down and we're gonna
see another kind of loop, and I use for
loops every day.
>> Brian Holt: But
I teach you this one first because it
looks really similar to an if statement,
right, and it functions relatively
similar to an if statement.
>> Brian Holt: There's another,
we're not gonna talk about it today, but
there's another one called a do loop,
it's really similar to a while loop,
it works almost the same.
The only difference between a do loop and
a while loop is,
a do loop is gonna happen at least once.
A do loop will guarantee,
I'm gonna run the body at least once and
then I'm gonna ask the while question,
whereas while loops just ask it.
I never see do loops, but
just know that they exist.
>> Brian Holt: Any questions
about while loops before I move on?
>> Brian Holt: If you put a bad
thing here,
I'm not gonna do it right now because
it's gonna crash my browser if I do it.
But let's say, I'm just gonna,
while friendsAtYourParty,
>> Brian Holt: Is greater than 10, so
if I did this,
>> Brian Holt: And
I made this equal to 10.
If I uncommented this line and
then commented the line underneath it out,
what would happen?
>> Brian Holt: You're gonna get
what's called an infinite loop, because
this is never ever going to be false.
It's cuz it's just gonna keep
adding itself because, while 10 is,
is 11 greater than 10, yep,
is 12, is 13, is 14, is 15?
And it's just gonna keep going forever and
ever until eventually it's gonna crash.
It's gonna crash the browser,
this is called an infinite loop.
They're very easy to do,
it will crash your program.
And that's fine,
we all do it, but actually,
I would have to make this 11 anyway.
>> Brian Holt: Or
the infamous while true
loop [LAUGH] right.
This is just gonna keep running
forever and ever and ever.
So be aware that there's a thing called
an infinite loop, it's really easy to do.
I don't wanna crash my browser right now,
cuz I'm teaching you things, but
that's what it would do.
>> Brian Holt: Questions about that?
If you ever see your browser lock up,
it's probably an infinite loop.
That's the most common reason
that if I wrote code that.
I guess we can just do it in here,
it wouldn't be very hard.
So while true,
console.log(i), and
then here,
I said let i = 0.
It's good to see what it looks
like when it crashes, okay?
So I save this,
this is gonna be an infinite loop, right?
I'm gonna come over here and just,
you can see that it's really
locking up my browser.
It's really unresponsive right now,
you can see I'm beach balling.
>> Brian Holt: At some point it's gonna
say, hey,
I think something's wrong [LAUGH].
Eventually Firefox will just kill the tab.
>> Brian Holt: Right,
but this is not responding.
I can't scroll, I can't do anything.
I'm just gonna close the tab.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
this is not what I wanted to do [LAUGH].
I have made a mistake [LAUGH].
>> Brian Holt: Anyway,
if this happens to you,
you've probably got an infinite
loop.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah,
this is right gone.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
so please close, there we go, thank god.
[LAUGH] Any questions while
Firefox puts its shit together?
>> Brian Holt: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: We have a question from
the chatroom.
What is the difference between
var and let?
>> Brian Holt: I will give you the one
sentence answer to that question
cuz I don't wanna get in to it.
It's a lengthy explanation,
and the difference is scope,
it's the way that they handle scope.
Let has block level scope and
var has function level scope.
If you are unsatisfied with that answer,
then I would invite you to Google it.
Something that I did wanna show you for
just a little bit,
there's these things that
are are called unary operators,
which is not something you need to know,
but I'm just gonna throw it out there.
Unary is in contrast to binary, right,
binary has two options or
two things, and unary has one.
So I have this first line right here,
friends = friendsAtYourParty + 1.
Right, plus would be what's called
a binary operator because it
requires one on this side and
one on this side.
Whereas here, you only need one thing.
Again, that's not really that useful
a distinction to know, it's just FYI.
So these four lines of code right here,
2 through 5, do exactly the same thing.
This adds 1 to friendsAtYourParty,
this adds 1 to friendsAtYourParty.
and so does this.
So you can see down here when
I console.log that, it's 4.
Now you might ask, why is there so
many ways to add 1 to something?
I think part of it's just legacy,
JavaScript is based in the language C,
C is a language from the 70s.
And C has all these features and
JavaScript just kind of adopted them.
And most languages that are C based,
like Java and Go and
a lot of these have legacy that
comes from C, and that's why.
So += right here is going
to add 1 back into this.
And so for example, I could put 5 here,
and it would add 5.
Right, so it's just going to add
whatever this number is to this total.
And I think down here,
I don't show it, but
there is also -=, so
that would subtract 5.
*=, /=, by the way, that's the way you
do divide in JavaScript, is slash.
And there's even, I'm gonna make this 2,
**, I think that should work.
It's one, so ** is exponent, so
if I have, I don't need to do it up here,
console.log(5 ** 2),
that is 5 squared, just so you know.
5 times 5, or cubed, 5 times 5
times 5, so that's what ** is.
Anyway let's go back to += 1,
just wanted you to see that
pattern cuz it does get used.
++, this is one that you'll see
a lot in conjunction with for loops.
It just means increment it by 1.
There is also, as you might imagine,
--, which is subtract 1.
There is no **, it's just ++ and
So that's why if you've ever
heard of the language C++.
>> Brian Holt: It's C
incremented by 1, right?
That's kind of the joke, anyway,
it wasn't funny then, it's not funny now.
[LAUGH] And then also,
you can put the ++ on the front, and
you can put the ++ on the back.
There is a minor difference
between the two,
it is not important.
>> Brian Holt: The difference
is when it gets incremented,
which in these two cases,
because it's the only thing on the line,
doesn't actually matter.
In JavaScript, you will always
see people put it on the end,
I don't think I've ever seen
anyone put it on the front.
I would even venture to say most
JavaScript developers don't know you can
put it on the front.
>> Brian Holt: But if you're writing C,
I guess in C best practices,
it's on the front.
I'm not a C developer, so don't believe
me, but that's what I've heard.
Okay, any questions about
incrementing things, make sense?
Okay, the reason why I show you this is,
you don't really see ++ a ton.
Did I use ++ when I did my code thing,
where's my code?
I did, right there,
it's one of those things that's so
automatic that I just
forget to explain it.
So, sorry, now hopefully I've
explained it so you get it.
[LAUGH] So going down here,
friendsAtYourParty = 0.
We're gonna talk about this kind of loop
right here, which is called a for loop.
Okay, obviously named after the for,
right here.
So you're gonna have three parts to a for
loop.
Okay, the first part is, you declare
what's called your control variable.
For whatever reason, since the beginning
of time, the control variable for a for
loop has always been i.
I don't know what it stands for,
I don't think it stands for anything, but
it is always i.
You can put on the things,
there's no reason it wouldn't work.
It's just that everyone calls it i,
so you will always see that called i.
If I have a for loop within a for loop,
then they just start
going up the alphabet.
So, the next one will be j, the next one
will be k, the next one will be l, m, n.
If you're going past n,
you have serious problems.
Honestly, if you're going past maybe k,
you're gonna have some real big problems.
>> Brian Holt: Anyway,
so this is always called i,
it needs to be let, right,
because if it's const, const can't change,
you can't change const.
So it's gonna be let i = 0,
the second part
is the condition, like the while loop.
As long as i <= 10, right,
so as long as this is true,
it's gonna keep doing it, as soon as this
is false, it breaks out of the loop.
And the last thing here is, what do
I do at the end of every loop, right?
So when it gets down here to the bottom,
it's gonna run whatever is here.
So here, I'm gonna run i++,
I'm gonna increment i by 1,
that's what I'm trying to say.
Now you absolutely could say,
let's just break this,
so I could totally make this 0,
I can make this part 10.
>> Brian Holt: And as long as i >=, shit,
I broke it, this is exactly what
I was trying to avoid doing.
Because every time it runs my
code as soon as I type it,
now I'm stuck in an infinite loop.
It's gonna say, hey, your web page is
slowing down, what would you like to do?
Stop it, thank you, refresh the page,
that's exactly what I was trying
to avoid doing, and I did it.
And now everything's back to
FiraCode again, whatever.
We're just gonna deal with this
being FiraCode for the moment, and
during the next break, I will fix it.
So just so you know, this little
character right here, the less than or
equal to, is two separate characters.
It's less than and equal, but
when I put them together,
my font combines them into one thing.
This is called a ligature,
if you wanna do that for your own code,
there's a thing called FiraCode.
There's also Operator,
which is what everyone swears by.
You have to pay $200 to use Operator.
It's a stupid font for $200,
don't buy it [LAUGH] it's dumb.
Anyway, FiraCode is free and
it's from Firefox, or Mozilla, rather.
Anyway, that's what's happening there.
What I was trying to demonstrate to you,
let's just do this like this.
>> Brian Holt: For let i = 10,
i >=,
>> Brian Holt: 0,
i--, so you can have it go
the other way too, right.
So now I can do this and
not break everything, and
this works exactly the same way.
Because now it's, rather than counting
up to ten, it's counting down to zero.
And if I wanted to make that even bigger,
I could start from a greater number and
it would come down even more,
even more, even more, even more,
right, make sense?
>> Brian Holt: Now
why would I use this over a while loop?
In this particular case,
a while loop actually would
probably work a little bit better.
But the reason why for loops end up being
really useful is, this i variable ends
up being useful because on every loop,
it's a different number.
And so sometimes that's useful, that's
kind of abstract for me to say right now.
But we'll see examples of that of where
that i variable becomes very useful to
use, particularly with arrays,
that we will get to in a little bit.